Geometry sets out from certain conceptions such
as “plane,” “point,” and “straight line,” with
which we are able to associate more or less definite ideas, and from certain simple propositions
(axioms) which, in virtue of these ideas, we are
inclined to accept as “true.” Then, on the basis
of a logical process, the justification of which we
feel ourselves compelled to admit, all remaining
propositions are shown to follow from those axioms,
i.e. they are proven. A proposition is then correct
(“true”) when it has been derived in the recognised manner from the axioms. The question of
the “truth” of the individual geometrical propositions is thus reduced to one of the “truth” of
the axioms. Now it has long been known that
the last question is not only unanswerable by the
methods of geometry, but that it is in itself entirely without meaning. We cannot ask whether
it is true that only one straight line goes through
two points. We can only say that Euclidean geometry deals with things called “straight lines,”
to each of which is ascribed the property of being
uniquely determined by two points situated on it.
The concept “true” does not tally with the
assertions of pure geometry, because by the word
“true” we are eventually in the habit of designating always the correspondence with a “real”
object; geometry, however, is not concerned with
the relation of the ideas involved in it to objects
of experience, but only with the logical connection
of these ideas among themselves.
It is not difficult to understand why, in spite of
this, we feel constrained to call the propositions of
geometry “true.” Geometrical ideas correspond
to more or less exact objects in nature, and these
last are undoubtedly the exclusive cause of the
genesis of those ideas. Geometry ought to refrain
from such a course, in order to give to its structure
the largest possible logical unity. The practice,
for example, of seeing in a “distance” two marked
positions on a practically rigid body is something
which is lodged deeply in our habit of thought.
We are accustomed further to regard three points
as being situated on a straight line, if their apparent positions can be made to coincide for observation with one eye, under suitable choice of
our place of observation.
If, in pursuance of our habit of thought, we now
supplement the propositions of Euclidean geometry
by the single proposition that two points on a
practically rigid body always correspond to the
same distance (line-interval), independently of
any changes in position to which we may subject
the body, the propositions of Euclidean geometry
then resolve themselves into propositions on the
possible relative position of practically rigid bodies.
Geometry which has been supplemented in
this way is then to be treated as a branch of
physics. We can now legitimately ask as to the
“truth” of geometrical propositions interpreted
in this way, since we are justified in asking whether
these propositions are satisfied for those real things
we have associated with the geometrical ideas. In
less exact terms we can express this by saying
that by the “truth” of a geometrical proposition
in this sense we understand its validity for a construction with ruler and compasses.
Of course the conviction of the “truth” of geometrical propositions in this sense is founded
exclusively on rather incomplete experience. For
the present we shall assume the “truth” of the
geometrical propositions, then at a later stage
(in the general theory of relativity) we shall see
that this “truth” is limited, and we shall consider
the extent of its limitation.